---
layout: post
title:  "Finite rings which are products of fields"
date:   2022-07-06 10:51:46 +0200
categories: miscellaneous mathématiques
usemathjax: true
---
<p style="text-align:justify;">Today, I would like to write about a fun exercise which appeared in the oral part of the entrance “concours” of the École normale supérieure some years before I entered the École (I believe it was two); I guess that it is of second- to third-year undergraduate level.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">The exercise is the following:</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><b>Exercise.</b> Let $\mathrm{A}$ be a finite ring. Under which condition is $\mathrm{A}$ (isomorphic to) a product of fields?</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">It was implicit that all rings and fields considered here were commutative. By finite, we mean that the underlying set of $\mathrm{A}$ is finite: it readily implies that if $\mathrm{A}$ is a product of fields, then the fields are finite and the indexing set is finite.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">After a few moments of (probably circumspect) reflection on the part of the candidate, the examiner suggested they study the case of a cyclic ring, that is, of $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ for some positive integer $n$. Let $n=p_1^{\alpha_1}\cdots p_s^{\alpha_s}$ be the decomposition of $n$ into its prime factors: $s$ is an integer, $p_i$ is a prime number and $\alpha_i$ is a positive integer for all $i$. Then the Chinese remainder lemma provides an isomorphism \[\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}\cong\prod_{i=1}^s\mathbb{Z}/p_i^{\alpha_i}\mathbb{Z}\] of rings. In particular, if $\alpha_i=1$ for all $i$, then $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a product of fields.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">In order to make an educated guess as to the condition in the general case, let us investigate what the condition $\alpha_i=1$ for all $i$ means in terms of the ring $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$. Assume indeed that this condition is not satisfied, so that $\alpha_i>1$ for some $i$. Let $m$ denote the number $m=p_1\cdots p_s$. Then $m$ is non-zero in $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ by assumption on $n$, but if $\alpha=\max(\alpha_1,\ldots,\alpha_s)$, then $m^\alpha=0$ modulo $n$. Therefore, (the class mod $n$ of) $m$ is a non-zero nilpotent element of $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$. On the other hand, by definition of the law on a product of rings, an element $(a_1,\ldots,a_r)$ a finite product $\mathrm{A}_1\times\cdots\times\mathrm{A}_r$ of rings is nilpotent if, and only if, $a_i$ is a nilpotent element of $\mathrm{A}_i$ for all $i$: since $0$ is the only nilpotent element of a field, it follows that $0$ is the only nilpotent element of a finite product of fields. Thus, if $\alpha_i>1$ for some $i$, then $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is not a product of rings, the reason being that it has a non-zero nilpotent. Reciprocally, if $\alpha_i=1$ for all $i$, then $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ has no non-zero nilpotents as a direct product of fields.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">The preceding arguments may be summarised as the following lemma:</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><b>Lemma.</b> <em>Let $n$ be a positive integer. Then the ring $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a product of fields if, and only if, $n$ is square-free, that is, it is not divisible by the square of a prime number. In this case, $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is the product of the fields $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$ where $p$ runs through the prime divisors of $n$. Equivalently, $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a product of fields if, and only if, $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ has non non-zero nilpotent elements.</em></p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">While the first condition is clearly of arithmetic nature and is dependent on the particular structure of $\mathbb{Z}$ as a factorial ring, the second is purely ring-theoretic; thus one might hope that it would provide the correct condition in the general case. We are going to show that this is correct.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><em>Remark.</em> The above arguments would likely have been enough to earn a good grade at this oral test of the “concours”.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Let now $\mathrm{A}$ be an arbitrary finite ring. We are going to show that $\mathrm{A}$ is a product of fields if, and only if, $\mathrm{A}$ has no non-zero elements. We have already proved that a product of fields satisfies this condition. For the converse implication, we will prove the following key lemma.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><b>Lemma.</b> <em>Let $\mathrm{A}$ be a Noetherian ring. Then the set of nilpotent elements of $\mathrm{A}$ is an ideal of $\mathrm{A}$. Furthermore, it is equal to the intersection of all prime ideals of $\mathrm{A}$.</em></p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Recall that a ring $\mathrm{A}$ is <em>Noethrian</em> if any non-empty family of ideals of $\mathrm{A}$ has a maximal element for inclusion. Recall also that an ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ of $\mathrm{A}$ is <em>prime</em> when $\mathfrak{p}$ is a strict ideal of $\mathrm{A}$ and when, given any two elements $x$ and $y$ of $\mathrm{A}$, if $xy$ belongs to $\mathfrak{p}$, then $x$ belongs to $\mathfrak{p}$ or $y$ belongs to $\mathfrak{p}$. Equivalently, $\mathfrak{p}$ is prime if $\mathrm{A}/\mathfrak{p}$ is a domain (in particular, it cannot be the zero ring).</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><em>Proof.</em> The fact that the set $\mathfrak{N}$ of nilpotent elements of $\mathrm{A}$, which is called the nilradical of $\mathrm{A}$, is an ideal of $\mathrm{A}$ is an easy but important exercise that we leave to the reader. In fact, the fact that the nilradical of $\mathrm{A}$ is the intersection of all prime ideals of $\mathrm{A}$ implies that it is in particular an ideal.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Let $x$ be a nilpotent element of $\mathrm{A}$. By definition, there exists a non-negative integer $n$ such that $x^n=0$. In particular, for any prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$, $x^n$ belongs to $\mathfrak{p}$: since $\mathfrak{p}$ is prime, this implies that $x$ belongs to $\mathfrak{p}$. This implies that the nilradical is a subset of the intersection of all prime ideals of $\mathrm{A}$.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Reciprocally, let $x$ be a non-nilpotent element; we have to show that there exists a prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ such that $x$ <em>does not</em> belong to $\mathfrak{p}$. Let $\mathrm{S}$ be the set $\mathrm{S}=\{x^n,n\in\mathbb{N}\}$. We observe that, given any prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$, $x\notin\mathfrak{p}$ if, and only if, $\mathrm{S}\cap\mathfrak{p}=\emptyset$. Thus we consider the set $\mathcal{F}$ of ideals $\mathrm{I}$ of $\mathrm{A}$ such that $\mathrm{I}\cap\mathrm{S}=\emptyset$. Since $x$ is not nilpotent, the ideal $\{0\}$ belongs to $\mathcal{F}$ so that it is not empty. Since $\mathrm{A}$ is Noetherian, the family $\mathcal{F}$ has a maximal element $\mathfrak{p}$.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Let us then show that $\mathfrak{p}$ is a prime ideal. Let $y$ and $z$ be elements of $\mathrm{A}\setminus\mathfrak{p}$; we show that the product $yz$ does not belong to $\mathfrak{p}$. Since $\mathfrak{p}$ is a maximal element of $\mathcal{F}$, the ideals $\mathfrak{p}+\mathrm{A}y$ and $\mathfrak{p}+\mathrm{A}z$ of $\mathrm{A}$, which strictly contain $\mathfrak{p}$, do not belong to $\mathcal{F}$. By definition, this means that there $\mathrm{S}\cap(\mathfrak{p}+\mathrm{A}y)$ and $\mathrm{S}\cap(\mathfrak{p}+\mathrm{A}z)$ are not empty, that is, that there exist $m\in\mathbb{N}$, $a\in\mathfrak{p}$ and $c\in\mathrm{A}$ such that $x^m=a+cy$, and there exist $n\in\mathbb{N}$, $b\in\mathfrak{p}$ and $d\in\mathrm{A}$ such that $x^m=b+dz$. Thus we observe that $$x^{m+n}=x^mx^n=(a+cy)(b+dz)=ab+bcy+adz+cdyz.$$ Since $\mathfrak{p}$ is an ideal of $\mathrm{A}$, $ab+bcy+adz$ belongs to $\mathfrak{p}$; since $\mathfrak{p}$ belongs to $\mathcal{F}$, $x^{m+n}$ does not belong to $\mathfrak{y}$. This implies that $cdyz$ does not belong to $\mathfrak{p}$; thus, $yz$ does not belong to $\mathfrak{p}$ as required.$\square$</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><em>Remark.</em> The hypothesis that $\mathrm{A}$ be Noetherian is superfluous, though obviously satisfied in our problem since we only consider finite rings. One argument uses a fundamental procedure in commutative algebra known as <em>localisation</em> at a multiplcative subset of $\mathrm{A}$, that is, at a subset stable under finite (including empty) products—I may write about it in another post. In our case, we localize at the multiplicative subset $\mathrm{S}=\{x^n,n\in\mathbb{N}\}$ of $\mathrm{A}$: we obtain a ring $\mathrm{A}_x$ endowed with a ring homomorphism $f:\mathrm{A}\rightarrow\mathrm{A}_x$ such that $f(x)$ is invertible and which is inital (in the sense of category theory) among ring homomorphisms with source $\mathrm{A}$ satisfying this condition: any ring homomorphism $g:\mathrm{A}\rightarrow\mathrm{C}$ with $g(x)$ invertible may be written as $h\circ f$ where $h:\mathrm{A}_x\rightarrow\mathrm{C}$ is a ring homomorphism. The assignment $\mathfrak{p}\mapsto f^{-1}(\mathfrak{p})$ induces a bijection between the set of prime ideals of $\mathrm{A}_x$ and the set of prime ideals $\mathfrak{p}$ of $\mathrm{A}$ which do not meet $\mathrm{S}$, that is, satisfying $\mathfrak{p}\cap\mathrm{S}=\emptyset$. In particular, according to Krull's theorem, $\mathrm{A}_x$ is the zero ring if, and only if, $x$ belongs to every prime ideal of $\mathrm{A}$. On the other hand, it is easy to show that if $\mathrm{S}$ is a multiplicative subset, then the localisation $\mathrm{S}^{-1}\mathrm{A}$ of $\mathrm{A}$ at $\mathrm{S}$ is the zero ring if, and only if, $0\in\mathrm{A}$ belongs to $\mathrm{S}$. Indeed, if it is the case, then denoting by $\varphi:\mathrm{A}\rightarrow\mathrm{S}^{-1}\mathrm{A}$ the localisation homomorphism, $\varphi(0)=0$ is invertible so that $\mathrm{S}^{-1}\mathrm{A}$ is necessarily the zero ring; reciprocally, if $\mathrm{S}^{-1}\mathrm{A}$ is the zero ring, then $\varphi(1)=0$ so that, by definition of the ring $\mathrm{S}^{-1}\mathrm{A}$ (which we have not written out in detail), there exists $s\in\mathrm{S}$ such that $s\cdot 1=s=0$: in particular, $0$ belongs to $\mathrm{S}$. Also observe that $x$ is nilpotent if, and only if, $0$ belongs to $\mathrm{S}_x$ by definition of $\mathrm{S}_x$. All in all, we see that $x$ is nilpotent if, and only if, the localisation $\mathrm{A}_x$ of $\mathrm{A}$ at $\mathrm{S}_x$ is the zero ring which is equivalent to $x$ belonging to each prime ideal as required.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Let us return to the exercise. Assume that $\mathrm{A}$ is a finite ring with non non-zero nilpotent; we have to show that $\mathrm{A}$ is a product of fields. Since $\mathrm{A}$ is finite, the domain $\mathrm{A}/\mathfrak{p}$ is finite for all prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$, hence a field according to the following lemma:

<p style="text-align:justify;"><b>Lemma.</b> <em>Let $\mathrm{R}$ be a domain whose underlying set is finite. Then $\mathrm{R}$ is a field.</em></p>

<p style="text-align:justify;"><em>Proof.</em> Let $y$ be a non-zero element of $\mathrm{R}$. Since $\mathrm{R}$ is a domain, the group homomorphism $z\mapsto yz$ has trivial kernel; therefore, it is injective and, as a result, surjective as the set underlying $\mathrm{R}$ is finite. In particular, there exists $z\in\mathrm{R}$ such that $yz=1$ so that $y$ is invertible. By definition, $\mathrm{R}$ is a field.$\square$</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Thus every prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ of $\mathrm{A}$ is <em>maximal</em> under inclusion: indeed, since $\mathrm{A}/\mathfrak{p}$ is a field, its ideals are itself and the zero ideal which exactly means that the ideals of $\mathrm{A}$ containing $\mathfrak{p}$ are $\mathrm{A}$ and $\mathfrak{p}$. In particular, any two (distinct) prime ideals $\mathfrak{p}$ and $\mathfrak{p}'$ of $\mathrm{A}$, $\mathfrak{p}+\mathfrak{p}'$ is an ideal of $\mathrm{A}$ strictly containing $\mathfrak{p}$ and is thus necessarily equal to $\mathrm{A}$ so that $\mathfrak{p}$ and $\mathfrak{p}'$ are coprime. It then follows from the Chinese remainder theorem that the evident ring homomorphism $$\mathrm{A}/\mathfrak{N}\rightarrow\prod_{\mathfrak{p}}\mathrm{A}/\mathfrak{p},$$ where the right-hand side product is indexed by the set of prime ideals of $\mathrm{A}$, is an isomorphism. It is a product of fields; on the other hand, since $\mathfrak{N}$ is the zero ideal by assumption, we have expressed $\mathrm{A}$ as a product of fields (up to isomorphism), as required.$\square$</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">On a side note, it is likely that this exercise was inspired by a part of the proof of Proposition 9 in Serre's “Géométrie algébrique et géométrie analytique”, Annales de l'Institut Fourier, tome 6, 1956, pp. 1–42 (more precisely, by the fourth paragraph of the proof).</p>
