---
layout: post
title:  "Why the name Quadratic cycles?"
date:   2022-07-03 23:38:00 +0200
categories: jekyll update
usemathjax: true
---
<p style="text-align:justify;">In this post, I'll explain the mathematical context surrounding my Ph.D. program, which should explain the name of the blog. As a warning, this is directed towards a public of specialists, maybe not of my own area of research, but at least of algebraic geometry or closely related fields. I will return to this post in less or non-technical language later on—as any mathematician knows, this is <em>much</em> harder than speaking to experts.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">I will introduced some terminology first. Let \(\mathrm{X}\) be a scheme and let \(\mathrm{V}\rightarrow\mathrm{X}\) be a vector bundle. We say that \(\mathrm{V}\) <em>splits</em> a free line bundle when there exists a vector bundle \(\mathrm{V}'\) such that \(\mathrm{V}\simeq\mathrm{V}\oplus\mathbb{A}^1\). This reduces the study of \(\mathrm{V}\) to that of \(\mathrm{V}'\) in many situations, thus simplifying it as vector bundles of low rank are easier to investigate. The <em>splitting problem</em> for \(\mathrm{X}\) consists in understanding which vector bundles on \(\mathrm{X}\) split of a free line bundle. Because of the significance of the geometric information on a space carried by vector bundles on that space, this problem is of great interest in general; more specifically, it is closely related to algebraic \(\mathrm{K}\)-theory.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Barge and Morel introduced a major tool in tackling the splitting problem in 2000 which they dubbed “groupes de Chow des cycles orientés” (in English, Chow groups of oriented cycles). The name did not last—in part because as a cohomological theory on schemes, “Chow groups of oriented cycles” do not satisfy the orientation axiom, thus making the terminology awkward—and we know call them <em>Chow–Witt groups</em>. Today, there are a number of ways to define these groups. The approach followed by Barge and Morel used a Milnor \(\mathrm{K}\)-theory complex whose cohomology computes Chow groups, and a Gersten–Witt complex introduced in the Ph.D. thesis of Schmid. The main difficulty with this approach was that the proof that the Gersten–Witt complex is indeed a complex was missing at the time. Fasel's thesis was devoted to defining these groups using another complex, the Gersten–Witt complex of Balmer–Walter, based on Balmer's derived Witt groups whose functoriality properties implied those of Chow–Witt groups—the latter's name then derived from their link to Chow groups and Witt groups respectively.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Let then \(k\) be a perfect field; we denote by \(\mathsf{Sm}/k\) the category whose objects are smooth \(k\)-schemes and whose morphisms are <em>arbitrary</em> morphisms of k-schemes. Let \(n\) be an integer, let \(\mathrm{X}\) be a smooth \(k\)-scheme and let \(\mathcal{L}\) be a line bundle on \(\mathrm{X}\). With these data is associated a group \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{L})\)—which depends solely on the isomorphism class of \(\mathcal{L}\)—in which lives, for any vector bundle \(\mathrm{V}\) on \(\mathrm{X}\) of rank \(n\) and with determinant bundle \(\mathcal{L}\), a class \(e(\mathrm{V})\) called the <em>Euler class</em> of \(\mathrm{V}\); when \(\mathcal{L}\) is the trivial line bundle, we omit it from the notation and simply write \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\). Chow–Witt groups possess properties very similar to those of Chow groups. For instance, they are contravariantly functorial for arbitrary morphisms of \(k\)-schemes: if \(f:\mathrm{Y}\rightarrow\mathrm{X}\) is a \(k\)-morphism between smooth \(k\)-schemes, then \(f\) induces a map \(f^*:\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{L})\rightarrow\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{Y},f^*\mathcal{L})\) which is functorial in \(f\). The Euler class is also functorial, i.e. for any vector bundle \(\mathrm{V}\) on \(\mathrm{X}\), we have \(e(f^*\mathrm{V})=f^*e(\mathrm{V})\). Furthermore, similarly to Chow groups, Chow–Witt groups satisfy localisation exact sequences. Moreover, they are partially covariantly functorial, though in a less pleasant way than Chow groups. More precisely, let \(p:\mathrm{Y}\rightarrow\mathrm{X}\) be a proper morphism between smooth \(k\)-schemes which we assume to be of constant relative dimension \(d\) and let \(\mathcal{M}\) be a line bundle on \(\mathrm{Y}\). Then there exists a morphism \(p_*:\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^{n+d}(\mathrm{Y},\mathcal{M})\rightarrow\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^{n}(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{L})\) (with the usual functoriality properties) only if $$\mathcal{M}\otimes p^*\mathcal{L}^{-1}=\omega_{\mathrm{Y}/k}\otimes p^*\omega_{\mathrm{X}/k}^{-1}$$ in \(\mathrm{Pic}(\mathrm{Y})/2\), the quotient of the Picard group of \(\mathrm{Y}\) by the multiplication by \(2\), where \(\omega_{\mathrm{Z}/k}\) is the determinant bundle of the sheaf of differentials of the smooth \(k\)-scheme \(\mathrm{Z}\). Finally, there is a graded commutative product structure on the Chow–Witt groups of \(\mathrm{X}\), the <em>intersection product</em> $$\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{L})\otimes\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^m(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{M})\rightarrow\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^{n+m}(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{L}\otimes\mathcal{N}).$$ Thus if we let \[\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}(\mathrm{X})=\bigoplus_{n\in\mathbb{N}}\bigoplus_{\mathcal{L}\in\mathrm{Pic}(\mathrm{X})}\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X},\mathcal{L}),\] then we obtain a contravariant functor \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}(\text{–})\) from the category \(\mathsf{Sm}/k\) to the category of graded commutative rings. We call \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}(\mathrm{X})\) the total Chow–Witt ring of \(\mathrm{X}\).</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">The interest of the Euler class in studying the splitting problem is the following property. If \(\mathrm{V}\) is a vector bundle on a smooth \(k\)-scheme \(\mathrm{X}\) and if \(\mathrm{V}\) splits, then \(e(\mathrm{V})\) vanishes; furthermore, the converse is true if in addition \(\mathrm{X}\) is connected and \(\mathrm{V}\) is of rank \(\dim\mathrm{X}\)—or, more generally, if, seen as locally constant functions on \(\mathrm{X}\), the rank of \(\mathrm{V}\) and the dimension of \(\mathrm{X}\) agree (in fact, the Chow–Witt groups of \(\mathrm{X}\) split as the direct sum of the Chow–Witt groups of the connected components if \(\mathrm{X}\) is not connected, each of which is irreducible as \(\mathrm{X}\) is smooth, and the Euler class of \(\mathrm{V}\) is the direct sum of the Euler classes of the restrictions of \(\mathrm{V}\) to each connected component). The bound \(\dim(\mathrm{X})\) is particularly relevant in light of Serre's theorem which asserts that a vector bundle of rank \(n>d\) on a smooth affine \(k\)-scheme splits a line bundle.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Chow–Witt groups possess an additional property which is in fact the reason for the blog's title (finally!). Let \(\mathrm{X}\) be a smooth \(k\)-scheme. We denote by \(\mathrm{CH}^n(\mathrm{X})\) the group of cycles of codimension \(n\) on \(\mathrm{X}\), and by \(\mathrm{CH}(\mathrm{X})\) the total Chow ring of \(\mathrm{X}\), that is, the direct sum of the groups \(\mathrm{CH}^n(\mathrm{X})\) endowed with the usual intersection product of cycles. Then \(\mathrm{CH}(\mathrm{X})\) is a graded commutative ring and the usual pullback of cycles induces a functor \(\mathrm{CH}(\text{–})\) from the category \(\mathsf{Sm}/k\) to the category of graded commutative rings, and there exists a (necessarily non-trivial, since the objets in question are rings) natural transformation from \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}(\text{–})\) to \(\mathrm{CH}(\text{–})\). Thus Chow–Witt groups are in a sense a refinement of Chow groups. Furthermore, the Euler class of a vector bundle \(\mathrm{V}\) of rank \(n\) on \(\mathrm{X}\) is sent to the top Chern class \(c_n(\mathrm{V})\in\mathrm{CH}^n(\mathrm{X})\) of \(\mathrm{V}\), so that the former also refines the latter.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">How may one think about this refinement of Chow groups into Chow–Witt groups? To simplify the discussion, we will concentrate on untwisted Chow–Witt groups, that is, on the groups \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\). An element of \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\) is roughly speaking a cycle of codimension \(n\), endowed with a (finite-dimensional, non-degenerate) symmetric bilinear form on the function field of each irreducible subvariety composing the cycle, with an additional ramification condition on these symmetric bilnear forms—they must in fact be unramified. The map \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\rightarrow\mathrm{CH}^n(\mathrm{X})\) then forgets the underlying symmetric bilinear forms and associates the cycle with the given element of the left-hand side: we call it the <em>suport</em> of the given element of \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\).</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Recall then that if \(\mathrm{K}\) is a field of characteristic different from \(2\), the association \(b\mapsto(x\mapsto b(x,x))\) induces a bijection between the set of finite-dimensional, non-degenerate symmetric bilinear forms and the set of finite-dimensional, non-degenerate quadratic forms. Therefore, when \(k\) is of characteristic different from \(2\), an elemnt of \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\) is roughly speaking an cycle with quadratic forms on each irreducible subvariety of the cycle; <em>thus the name quadratic cycles</em>!</p>

<p style="text-align:justify;">Because of the additional datum of symmetric bilinear forms on the function fields of the cycle, one easily conceives that the support map from Chow–Witt groups to Chow groups may not be injective and this is indeed the case. Interestingly, because of the ramification condition, not every cycle of codimension \(n\) on \(\mathrm{X}\) is the support of an element of \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\), so that the map \(\widetilde{\mathrm{CH}}^n(\mathrm{X})\rightarrow\mathrm{CH}^n(\mathrm{X})\) is not surjective either.</p>
